Fashion photography is subject to trends in much the same way as the clothes it features. The last century produced a large and diverse range of photographic styles and techniques that now inform a wide constellation of aesthetic references, stretching from polished futurism to post-90’s grunge to a fantastical, antique opulence. Filter that through today’s ephemeral digital platforms like Tumblr and Instagram, and it’s clear that the most recent wave of emerging photographers have an incredible wellspring of visual language to draw upon when creating imagery.
In recent years, this agglomeration of references (and its resulting hybrids) have given rise to an exciting crop of talented young photographers who have approached the world of fashion with fresh eyes. Many of these new Generation Y and Z talents are female photographers shooting intimate images of female subjects, prompting much discussion on what has been called a new “female gaze.”
Borrowed from the worlds of art and cinema, the term has been assumed by the fashion industry to explain and classify the work of a host of women whose images empower women through their approach to the female body, youth, race, ageing and a celebration of the essentially imperfect nature of female beauty in daily life. Proponents of the idea are calling it a reaction to the prominence of the “male gaze” (names like Helmut Newton, Mario Testino, Mert Alas and Marcus Piggott come to mind), however it seems these young female talents themselves are less convinced by the concept than those responsible for pinning the label on them.
“Women have always been looking,” says 28-year-old Amanda Charchian, a Los Angeles-based Iranian-American photographer who feels uncomfortable with the recent trendiness of the term. Whilst women have photographed each other for fashion imagery for decades, their output has rarely been classified so specifically. And the idea that young women like Harley Weir, Petra Collins, Coco Capitán, Charlotte Wales, Gia Coppola and Charchian are being labelled in this way is both positive and unnerving all at once.
“I think our aesthetic is perhaps grouped as a response to how photography, specifically in the field of fashion, used to be thought of, and how we don't see women like that anymore,” says 24-year-old Coco Capitán, a Spanish photographer whose collaborations with fashion houses like Gucci and Paco Rabanne have run parallel to her studies at London’s Royal College of Art, from which she graduated last year with a Master of Fine Arts in Photography. “I think our photography shares a common interest in finding new ways of representing the female body and the female subject even if done through different aesthetics,” she continued. Capitán’s naïve, filmic imagery pays debt to the legacy of Juergen Teller’s spontaneous, unpolished style and the meticulous analogue representation of Collier Schorr’s early work, mixed with existential handwritten musings reminiscent of David Shrigley’s text-based art.
“I mostly take pictures of women that are aimed at women,” says New York-based British photographer Charlotte Wales, whose dewy, pastel-inflected images have graced the pages of British Vogue, Vogue Paris and Pop Magazine. She also shot the Spring/Summer 2017 Chloé campaign. “As a woman I approach that situation with empathy. I can imagine what it’s like to be the model, I imagine the various incarnations of the woman I want to be. I think perhaps it makes me a more sympathetic photographer. But I wouldn’t know because I’ve never been a man! I suspect you could draw parallels between my work and other female photographers working now; but you could also categorise it in lots of other ways that would put me in a different box: my race, my nationality, even the year I was born.”
This notion of intimacy and shared experience with a view to create positive representations of the female form (for a female audience) may be one of the few true threads that stitch together this fashionable notion of the female gaze, certainly when one listens to the self-referential, unapologetic raison d’être of each of these creatives — none of whom seem to be pushing any wider cultural agenda other than their own creative development. There is no doubt that certain artistic similarities are rife amongst their portfolios — close-up shots of female erogenous zones (and questioning what those may be), metaphoric representations of genitalia through flora and fruit and a tendency to portray a more realistic female body image than previous industry standards — but all these tropes are also evidence of the application of art photography references to fashion images. Coupled with the breakdown of censorship, they all point to a new level of understanding as to how the fashion image can portray contemporary womanhood.
pointeurvers:p6
fin